.TH RECEIVER_STREAM 1 "2026-07-12" "gnat-lt-pro" "gnat-lt-pro Manual"
.SH NAME
receiver_stream \- one\-way LT fountain\-code receiver daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B receiver_stream
.RB [ \-\-pipe ]
.RB [ \-\-progress ]
.RB [ \-\-config
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-\-max\-inflight
.IR n ]
.RB [ \-\-evict\-timeout
.IR s ]
.br
.RB [ \-\-syslog " | " \-\-log
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-\-log\-level
.IR lvl ]
.RB [ \fIport spool SEED loss%\fR ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B receiver_stream
receives an LT fountain stream from
.BR sender_stream (1)
over UDP and reconstructs the original files.  A tight
.B capture loop
drains the socket in batches (\fBrecvmmsg\fR), routes each datagram to its
transfer by
.BR FILEID ,
and accumulates it into a pre\-allocated per\-group decoder state \(em it never
decodes on the capture path, so the socket buffer is not starved.  A separate
.B decode task
reconstructs each completed group, writes it out, and on the trailer applies the
whole\-stream
.B checksum gate.
.PP
Up to
.I max_inflight
transfers (distinct FILEIDs) decode
.B concurrently,
each finalizing independently; RAM is bounded by a fixed pool of group states.
The
.I SEED
must match the sender's.
.PP
In
.B file mode
the process is a daemon: it loops indefinitely, and each transfer is written to
.IR spool / name
and gated \(em on a checksum match a
.RI \fB name \fR.finished
marker is written, otherwise
.RI \fB name \fR.corrupt.
In
.B \-\-pipe
mode it handles a single transfer, streams the decoded bytes to standard output,
and exits with the verdict as its status.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-pipe
Single\-shot: stream the decoded payload of the first transfer to standard output,
then exit (exit status = verdict).
.TP
.B \-\-progress
Print a throttled progress line to standard error.
.TP
.BI \-\-config " file"
Read settings from
.IR file
(see
.BR "CONFIGURATION FILE" ).
If omitted,
.I /etc/lt-diode/receiver.conf
is read when it exists.
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-inflight " n"
Maximum concurrent transfers (clamped to the compile\-time ceiling, 16).  The
group\-state pool (~32\ MB per state, ~2n states) is allocated at start\-up, so a
larger value uses more RAM.  Default 3.
.TP
.BI \-\-evict\-timeout " s"
Seconds of inactivity after which a stalled transfer (lost trailer) is evicted as
.RB \fB name \fR.corrupt.
Default 10.
.TP
.B \-\-syslog
Route log lines to
.BR syslog (3)
(facility
.BR daemon ,
ident
.BR lt-diode-receiver ).
.TP
.BI \-\-log " file"
Append log lines to
.IR file .
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-level " lvl"
Minimum level:
.BR debug ", " info " (default), " warn ", " error .
.TP
.B \-\-with\-dpdk
Capture with DPDK poll-mode kernel bypass instead of a UDP socket.  Frames are
raw Ethernet (EtherType
.BR 0x88B6 ),
so the
.I port
operand is ignored on this path.  Requires a binary built with
.BR "WITH_DPDK=yes ./tools/build.sh" ;
otherwise this exits 2 with a diagnostic.  See
.B TRANSPORTS
below.
.TP
.BI \-\-eal " args"
EAL command line passed verbatim to DPDK, as one quoted argument, e.g.
.RB \(dq "\-\-no\-huge \-l 0 \-\-vdev=net_memif0,role=server,socket=/tmp/s.sock,socket\-abstract=no" \(dq.
Only meaningful with
.BR \-\-with\-dpdk .
.SH TRANSPORTS
The proven codec core takes a 1472\-byte buffer and never names a socket, so the
transport lives entirely in the trusted shell: selecting one does not re\-discharge
any proof obligation.  Two are available.
.TP
.B kernel (default)
.BR recvmmsg (2)
batch drain of a UDP socket.  The trusted surface is a few kernel\-bounded
syscalls.  This is the assurance\-maximal configuration.
.TP
.B DPDK (opt\-in)
.BR rte_eth_rx_burst ()
polling of a userspace poll\-mode driver.  This moves DPDK's EAL, mempool and NIC
PMD \(em a large third\-party C body \(em plus a small mandatory C shim onto the data
path, inside the trusted computing base.  Safety is unaffected (the core is still
proved, and the checksum gate still marks any mis\-decode
.BR .corrupt ),
but what must be
.I trusted
grows.  Do not enable it unless you have accepted that trade; see
.I docs/ASSURANCE.md
\(sc5.1.
.SH OPERANDS
.I port spool SEED loss%
may be given positionally or via the config file (\fBport\fR, \fBspool\fR,
\fBseed\fR, \fBloss\fR).  They are required as four positional arguments only when
not supplied by the config.
.I loss%
is accepted for parity with the sender; the receiver decodes from whatever arrives.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
A
.B "key = value"
file (\fB#\fR comments, whitespace trimmed).  Precedence, low to high:
built\-in defaults < config file < command\-line.  Recognised keys:
.TP
.BR port ", " spool ", " seed ", " loss
Transport / spool settings (as the positional operands).
.TP
.B verify_log
Path of the verdict journal (default
.IR spool /verify.log ).
.TP
.BR max_inflight ", " evict_timeout
As
.BR \-\-max\-inflight " / " \-\-evict\-timeout .
.TP
.BR log_dest ", " log_file ", " log_level
Log destination
.RB ( stderr " | " file " | " syslog ),
file path, and minimum level.
.SH FILES
.TP
.IR spool / name
Decoded output file (created with
.BR O_CREAT | O_EXCL | O_WRONLY | O_NOFOLLOW ;
numbered
.IR .1 ", " .2 ", \(em on a name collision)."
.TP
.IR spool / name \fB.finished\fR ", " spool / name \fB.corrupt\fR
Per\-transfer verdict markers.
.TP
.IR spool /verify.log
Append\-only journal; one line per finalized transfer:
.RS
.EX
<timestamp> <path> bytes=N verdict=ok|corrupt reason=ok|decode|checksum|size|eviction
.EE
.RE
.TP
.I /etc/lt-diode/receiver.conf
Default configuration file.
.SH EXIT STATUS
In file mode the daemon does not exit on its own.  In
.B \-\-pipe
mode it exits
.B 0
when the whole\-stream checksum matches, non\-zero otherwise.
.SH SECURITY
Output is created with
.BR O_EXCL " (never overwrites; a pre\-planted symlink at the name is skipped)"
and
.BR O_NOFOLLOW " (a symlink is never followed)."
The FILEID is reduced to a safe basename \(em only
.BR "[A\-Za\-z0\-9._\-]" ,
never
.IR . ", " .. ,
a leading dot, or a path separator \(em or the transfer is rejected.
.SH NOTES
For line\-rate reception raise the kernel socket\-buffer ceiling, e.g.
.IR "sysctl \-w net.core.rmem_max=134217728" .
The receiver already requests a large
.B SO_RCVBUF
and batches with
.BR recvmmsg ;
without a raised ceiling and on a link with no backpressure the sender may need
.BR \-\-pace\-us .
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
File\-mode daemon:
.PP
.RS
.EX
receiver_stream 9000 /var/lib/lt-diode/incoming 42 30
.EE
.RE
.PP
From a config file, three concurrent transfers:
.PP
.RS
.EX
receiver_stream --config /etc/lt-diode/receiver.conf --max-inflight 3
.EE
.RE
.PP
Pipe a ZFS stream straight into
.BR "zfs receive" :
.PP
.RS
.EX
receiver_stream --pipe 9000 /tmp/ltc 42 30 | zfs receive tank/ds
.EE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sender_stream (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Ada/SPARK port produced at Politehnica University Timisoara; based on
lt-diode-pro (cherubimro), itself a fork of melorian94/robust-soliton-LT-C by Petra.
.SH LICENSE
GNU Affero General Public License v3.0.
