.TH SENDER_STREAM 1 "2026-07-12" "gnat-lt-pro" "gnat-lt-pro Manual"
.SH NAME
sender_stream \- one\-way LT fountain\-code sender (streaming, reads stdin)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sender_stream
.RB [ \-\-progress ]
.RB [ \-\-pace\-us
.IR us ]
.RB [ \-\-syslog " | " \-\-log
.IR file ]
.RB [ \-\-log\-level
.IR lvl ]
.I IP port SEED name loss%
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sender_stream
reads a payload from
.B standard input
and transmits it over UDP as a
.B pure LT (Luby Transform) rateless erasure\-coded
stream, for delivery across a strictly
.B one\-way
channel \(em a hardware data diode, or any lossy link with
.B no feedback and no retransmission.
It emits a continuous stream of XOR\-combined coding packets; the receiver
reconstructs the file from
.I any
sufficiently large subset that arrives, so a lost packet is never re\-requested.
.PP
The input is coded
.B group\-locally
(~10\ MB per group), so it is read sequentially and never spooled or seeked \(em
a pipe such as
.B zfs send
feeds straight in.  All packets go to a
.B single UDP port
(the packet's role is encoded in its header, so the C reference's three
consecutive ports are not needed).  Every coding packet carries only its index;
both ends derive the packet seed from
.RI ( SEED ,
group, index), so the receiver replays the same source\-symbol selection.
.PP
At end of input a
.B trailer
packet is sent five times carrying the exact byte count, the total group count
and a whole\-stream XOR checksum, which the receiver uses as an integrity gate.
The
.I SEED
and
.I loss%
values
.B must be identical
on the sender and receiver.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-progress
Print a throttled (~1/s) progress line to standard error: groups and bytes sent
and the average MB/s.  The stdin size is unknown, so there is no percentage or ETA.
.TP
.BI \-\-pace\-us " us"
Sleep roughly
.I us
microseconds per packet (applied in batches).  A real diode is paced by network
backpressure; use this on loopback or a receiver that cannot keep up.  Default 0
(no pacing).
.TP
.B \-\-syslog
Route operational log lines to
.BR syslog (3)
(facility
.BR daemon ,
ident
.BR lt-diode-sender )
instead of standard error.
.TP
.BI \-\-log " file"
Append operational log lines (timestamp + level) to
.IR file .
.TP
.BI \-\-log\-level " lvl"
Minimum level to emit:
.BR debug ", " info " (default), " warn ", " error .
.TP
.B \-\-with\-dpdk
Transmit with DPDK poll\-mode kernel bypass instead of a UDP socket.  Packets go
out as raw Ethernet frames (EtherType
.BR 0x88B6 ),
so the
.I IP
and
.I port
operands are ignored on this path (pass any placeholder).  Requires a binary
built with
.BR "WITH_DPDK=yes ./tools/build.sh" ;
otherwise this exits 1 with a diagnostic.
.TP
.BI \-\-eal " args"
EAL command line passed verbatim to DPDK, as one quoted argument, e.g.
.RB \(dq "\-\-no\-huge \-l 1 \-\-vdev=net_memif0,role=client,socket=/tmp/s.sock,socket\-abstract=no" \(dq.
Only meaningful with
.BR \-\-with\-dpdk .
.TP
.BI \-\-dst " MAC"
Destination MAC on the DPDK path,
.IR aa:bb:cc:dd:ee:ff .
Default is broadcast, which is what a diode wants: the sender need not know the
receiver.
.SH TRANSPORTS
The encoder, the sampler and the wire format are identical on both paths; only
how a serialized packet leaves the process changes.  The DPDK path moves DPDK's
EAL, mempool and NIC PMD, plus a small mandatory C shim, into the trusted
computing base.  The kernel path remains the assurance\-maximal default.  See
.BR receiver_stream (1)
and
.I docs/ASSURANCE.md
\(sc5.1 for the full trade.
.SH OPERANDS
.TP
.I IP
Destination IPv4 address of the receiver.
.TP
.I port
Destination UDP port (must match the receiver's).
.TP
.I SEED
Shared LT seed; must be identical on sender and receiver.
.TP
.I name
Logical transfer id placed in every packet header.  It is
.B not
a file that is opened \(em only its basename (sanitized) names the receiver's
output.
.TP
.I loss%
Expected channel loss, 0..90.  More coding packets are sent at higher loss so the
receiver still gets ~1.25x
.I K
packets per group (comfortably above the ~1.15x decode threshold of the tuned
Robust Soliton distribution).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B 0
on success; non\-zero on a usage or socket setup error.
.SH SECURITY
The channel is one\-way by design: there is no return path, so a corrupt or
under\-provisioned transfer cannot be repaired \(em choose
.I loss%
conservatively for the link.  The
.I name
operand never opens or reads a file.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Send a file (30% loss margin):
.PP
.RS
.EX
cat bigfile | sender_stream 10.0.0.3 9000 42 bigfile 30
.EE
.RE
.PP
Replicate a ZFS dataset with zero temp space on both ends:
.PP
.RS
.EX
zfs send tank/ds@snap | sender_stream 10.0.0.3 9000 42 repl 30
.EE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR receiver_stream (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Ada/SPARK port produced at Politehnica University Timisoara; based on
lt-diode-pro (cherubimro), itself a fork of melorian94/robust-soliton-LT-C by Petra.
.SH LICENSE
GNU Affero General Public License v3.0.
